---
layout: left-and-right-navs
title: Layout- Week 03
thumbnail: /tutorials/html/images/layout-1.png
pixelate-thumbnail: true
tagline: Use CSS to lay out your content.
sort-key: 300
meta-title: Layout- Intro to Web Dev Week 03
meta-description: Use CSS to lay out your content.
meta-image: /tutorials/html/images/layout-1.png
hide-video-icon: true
previousPost: /teaching/intro-to-web-dev-2022-spring/week-02-css
nextPost: /teaching/intro-to-web-dev-2022-spring/week-04-javascript
tags: [teaching]
---

# Layout - Week 03

{% include toc.md %}

Welcome to week 3 of Intro to Web Dev!

{% include youtube-embed.html slug="nxB2lfbJ7eg" %}

Last week, you used CSS to style your HTML by setting things like font colors. CSS can also be used for positioning elements and laying out your page. There are a lot of different ways to do that, so I wanted to spend this week on just this aspect of CSS.

Work through the activities in this page to complete the week!

---

# Layout

*Estimated time: 90 minutes*

First, read through the tutorial and watch the video:

{% include url-thumbnail.html url="/tutorials/html/layout" %}

{% include youtube-embed.html slug="KpGeXg84Zh4" %}

# Quiz

1. In your own words, what is grid layout? When might you use it?
2. In your own words, what is flexbox layout? When might you use it?
3. In your own words, what are media queries? When might you use them?
4. What's your favorite grid or flexbox property, and what does it do? *Note: There is no wrong answer to this question. If you don't have a favorite, pick one you used most often, or one that surprised you.*
5. What do the `grid-auto-columns` and `grid-auto-rows` properties do? *Note: These properties were not mentioned in any of this week's content. I'm testing that you can research and read about new CSS properties you haven't seen before. Feel free to use a search engine and resources like W3SChools and MDN to answer this question.*

# Project

*Estimated time: 1 hour*

Now you've seen the fundamentals of layout in CSS, including flexbox and grid.

To practice that, modify the files in the `week-03-layout` directory of your project repo.

{% include youtube-embed.html slug="lebupYDBnJg" %}

# Checklist

1. Learn about layout in CSS
2. Follow the directions in the `week-03-layout` directory of your project repo
3. Push those changes to GitHub and confirm you can see them in your GitHub Pages site
4. Get ready to present your work. Make sure your camera and microphone work!
