---
layout: default
title: CSS - Week 02
thumbnail: /teaching/intro-to-web-dev-2022-spring/images/week-02-css/css.png
pixelate-thumbnail: true
tagline: Use CSS to style your content.
sort-key: 200
meta-title: CSS - Intro to Web Dev Week 02
meta-description: Use CSS to style your content.
meta-image: /teaching/intro-to-web-dev-2022-spring/images/week-02-css/css.png
hide-video-icon: true
previousPost: /teaching/intro-to-web-dev-2022-spring/week-01-html
nextPost: /teaching/intro-to-web-dev-2022-spring/week-03-layout
tags: [teaching]
---

# CSS - Week 02

{% include toc.md %}

{% include youtube-embed.html slug="3OYpn0SZfdE" %}

Welcome to week 2 of Intro to Web Dev!

Last week, you set up your GitHub repo and your coding environment. You learned about HTML, and you used HTML tags to build a webpage.

HTML tells the browser what kind of content to display. Browsers have a few default styles, for example headings are big and bold, and links are blue and underlined. If you want to add your own styling, like different fonts, colors, and effects, then you need to go beyond HTML and use CSS.

Work through the activities in this page to complete the week!

---

# CSS

*Estimated time: 1 hour*

First, read through the tutorial and watch the video:

{% include url-thumbnail.html url="/tutorials/html/css" %}

{% include youtube-embed.html slug="pIXEVO0S_Ow" %}

---

# Quiz

1. In your own words, what is CSS?
2. What's the difference between element selectors, ID selectors, and class selectors?
3. What's your favorite CSS property, and what does it do? *Note: There is no wrong answer to this question. If you don't have a favorite, pick one you used most often, or one that surprised you.*
4. What does the CSS **text-transform** property do? *Note: This property was not mentioned in any of this week's content. I'm testing that you can research and read about new CSS properties you haven't seen before. Feel free to use a search engine and resources like W3SChools and MDN to answer this question.*
5. What does the **cascading** part of CSS mean? Can you give an example?

---

# Project

*Estimated time: 1 hour*

Now you've seen the fundamentals of CSS and styling content.

To practice that, modify the files in the `week-02-css` directory of your project repo.

{% include youtube-embed.html slug="WYA5PZHaqDM" %}

---

# Checklist

1. Learn about CSS
2. Follow the directions in the `week-02-css` directory of your project repo
3. Push those changes to GitHub and confirm you can see them in your GitHub Pages site
4. Get ready to present your work. Make sure your camera and microphone work!
