---
layout: default
title: HTML - Week 01
thumbnail: /tutorials/html/images/html-2.png
tagline: Set up your environment and use HTML to create a webpage.
sort-key: 100
meta-title: HTML - Intro to Web Dev Week 01
meta-description: Set up your environment and use HTML to create a webpage.
meta-image: /tutorials/html/images/html-3.png
tags: [teaching]
---

# Setup and HTML - Week 01

{% include toc.md %}

# Goals

This week has three main goals:

1. Set up your coding environment.
2. Learn about HTML and use it to create and deploy a webpage.
3. Get used to how this class works.

# GitHub Setup

*Estimated time: 30 minutes*

[GitHub](https://github.com) is a website that lets you post your code so you can keep it organized and share it with other people. We'll be using GitHub to share our code with each other.

First, work through this guide:

{% include url-thumbnail.html url="/teaching/intro-to-web-dev/week-01-github" %}

# Environment Setup

*Estimated time: 30 minutes*

Then, if you have your own computer that lets you install programs and download files, then work through this guide:

{% include url-thumbnail.html url="/teaching/intro-to-web-dev/week-01-desktop-setup" %}

If you have a computer that doesn't let you install programs and download files (like a Chromebook), or if you're using a shared computer, work through this guide instead:

👷‍♂️ Coming soon! 👷‍♂️

# HTML

*Estimated time: 2 hours*

Now that you have your environment set up, you're ready to start learning about web development!

This week focuses on HTML.

Read through these tutorials:

{% include url-thumbnail.html url="/tutorials/html/html" %}
{% include url-thumbnail.html url="/tutorials/html/html-tags" %}

# Project

*Estimated time: 1 hour*

Now you've seen the fundamentals of HTML and HTML tags. More importantly, you know how to use tools like Google, W3Schools, and MDN to find more information.

To practice all of that, modify the files in the `week-01-html` directory of your project repo.

# Checklist

1. Download GitHub Desktop
2. Fork the class's project repository and enable GitHub Pages
3. Clone the repo, either using GitHub Desktop or Replit
4. Make a small change to the top-level `index.html` file, push it to GitHub, and see the change in your GitHub Pages site
5. Read through the HTML tutorials
6. Follow the directions in the `week-01-html` directory of your project repo
7. Push those changes to GitHub and confirm you can see them in your GitHub Pages site
8. Get ready to present your work. Make sure your camera and microphone work!

# Optional Bonus Challenge

If you finish all of the above and want some more practice, try creating a GitHub profile README by following this guide:

{% include url-thumbnail.html url="/tutorials/html/github-profile-readme" %}

# Additional Resources

- [Soft Corruptor](http://cordite.org.au/poetry/game/soft-corruptor/) is an interactive poem that uses HTML tags in an interesting way.
- [W3Schools](https://www.w3schools.com/html/default.asp) has some of the best HTML tutorials on the internet.
- [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Introduction_to_HTML) also has great tutorials, and an even better reference.