---
layout: post
title: jQuery
thumbnail: /tutorials/javascript/images/jquery-1.png
tagline: Learn about one of the most popular JavaScript libraries.
sort-key: 2100
meta-title: jQuery Tutorial
meta-description: Learn about one of the most popular JavaScript libraries.
meta-image: /tutorials/html/javascript/jquery-2.png
tags: [tutorial, javascript, jquery]
---

**Note:** I wrote this tutorial back in 2017. Since then, I've personally stopped using jQuery. I'm leaving this tutorial up for now, but I recommend using vanilla JavaScript and CSS instead!

---

{% include toc.md %}

At this point on your JavaScript journey, you know how to write code that modifies the page using functions like `getElementById()` and variables like `innerHTML`, and by setting event attributes to call functions when the user interacts with the page. You also know how to use JavaScript libraries by loading them into a `<script>` tag and using the objects and functions they define.

This tutorial introduces a JavaScript library called jQuery. For years, jQuery was the most popular JavaScript library, and it contains a bunch of objects and functions that make common JavaScript tasks (like making an interactive webpage, loading data, and building a user interface) easier.

# The `$` Symbol

Before we go further, I just want to pause and point out one thing: you can use the `$` symbol as a variable name in JavaScript. So this is completely fine:

```javascript
var $ = "happy coding";
console.log($);
```

That might look a little weird, but it's very similar to using `x` or `myMessage` or any other variable name. There's nothing special about the `$` symbol. Why I'm mentioning this will make sense in a minute. Anyway, back to jQuery.

# jQuery

To use JQuery, first load the library:

```html
<script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-2.2.4.js"></script>
```

Now that you've loaded the library, you can use the `jQuery()` function that the library provides. The `jQuery()` function works in two forms:

- If you pass it a reference to a function, it calls that function when the page loads. This is similar to setting the `onload` attribute of the `<body>` tag.
- If you pass it a string, it returns a jQuery object that wraps the element(s) identified by that string. This is similar to the `getElementsByTag()`, `getElementsByClass()`, and `getElementById()` functions all rolled into one.

Let's start with an example **without** JQuery:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
	<title>Non JQuery Example</title>
	<script>
		function clicked() {
			document.getElementById('clickMe').innerHTML = "Thanks!";
		}
		
		function addClickListener(){
			document.getElementById("clickMe").addEventListener("click", clicked);
		}
	</script>
</head>
<body onload="addClickListener()">
	<p id="clickMe">Click me!</p>
</body>
</html>
```

This code uses the `onload` attribute of the `<body>` tag to call the `addClickListener()` function when the page loads. The `addClickListener()` function uses the `document.getElementById()` function to find the element with an id of `clickMe`, and sets the click listener to be the `clicked()` function. Finally, the `clicked()` function sets the `innerHTML` of the element, which changes the text that's displayed in the element.

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="bgYOor" height="450" %}

Now, let's see that using JQuery:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
	<title>JQuery Example</title>
	<script src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-2.2.4.js"></script>
	<script>
		function clicked(){
			jQuery("#clickMe").html("Thanks!");
		}
	
		function addClickListener(){
			jQuery("#clickMe").click(clicked);
		}
		
		jQuery(addClickListener);
	</script>
</head>
<body>
	<p id="clickMe">Click me!</p>
</body>
</html>
```

This code does the exact same thing, but it uses jQuery instead of vanilla JavaScript.

Instead of using the `onload` attribute, this code uses the `jQuery()` function and passes it a reference to the `addClickListener()` function. This form of the `jQuery()` function sets up a `ready` function similar to how the `onload` attribute works.

After the page is loaded, the `addClickListener()` function then uses the `jQuery()` function and passes it a string identifier, in this case the ID (starting with a `#` symbol) of an element to find. That function returns a jQuery object, which contains a bunch of functions that let you interact with the underlying html. This code uses jQuery's `click()` function to add a click listener, and it passes the `clicked()` function into it.

Finally, the `clicked()` function uses the `jQuery()` function to get the element again, then calls jQuery's `html()` function on that jQuery object to set its content.

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="bgYOor" height="WRXLXX" %}

# The `$` Variable

Now, remember what I said about the `$` symbol being a perfectly normal variable name? The reason I said that is this: somewhere in JQuery's library, it does this:

```javascript
var $ = jQuery;
```

That means that instead of using the `jQuery()` function, you can use the `$()` function instead. So the above code can be rewritten:

```javascript
function clicked(){
	$("#clickMe").html("Thanks!");
}

function addClickListener(){
	$("#clickMe").click(clicked);
}

$(addClickListener);
```

This does the exact same thing that calling the `jQuery()` function did, but now it uses the `$` shorthand instead. This is how most jQuery code is written. If you see a `$` symbol in somebody else's JavaScript, chances are they're using jQuery. At first it looks a little weird, but keep in mind that this is still normal JavaScript, using the objects and functions in the jQuery library.

# You don't have to use jQuery

`<rant>`JQuery is so popular that some people don't really know how to use JavaScript without it. (See also: the [use JQuery](http://meta.stackexchange.com/a/19492/294611) joke on Stack Overflow.) But keep in mind that jQuery is "just" a bunch of JavaScript written by other people. It doesn't **add** anything that JavaScript can't already do. It's not a different language.

jQuery can be great, but I think it's a mistake to rely on it too much before learning about [vanilla](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vanilla_software) JavaScript (exactly what you've been using already). I highly recommend going without it for a while, especially if you're just starting out.`</rant>`

You can always come back here after you've had some more practice with regular JavaScript!
