---
layout: tutorial
title: Arrays
thumbnail: /tutorials/javascript/images/arrays-1.png
pixelate-thumbnail: true
tagline: Store multiple values.
sort-key: 800
meta-title: JavaScript Arrays Tutorial
meta-description: Use JavaScript arrays to store multiple values.
meta-image: /tutorials/javascript/images/arrays-1.png
previousPost: /tutorials/javascript/for-loops
nextPost: /tutorials/javascript/libraries
tags: [tutorial, javascript, arrays]
---

{% include toc.md %}

Now you know the fundamentals of JavaScript. You've created variables and functions, you've used `if` statements to conditionally take different actions in your code, and you've used `for` loops to repeat code multiple times.

This tutorial introduces arrays, which let you store multiple values in a single variable. This makes it easier to work with data and groups of items.

{% include youtube-embed.html slug="0yQjB2kGqnM" %}

---

# Multiple Variables

By now you've seen variables, which let you store a single:

```javascript
let favoriteAnimal = 'cat';

document.write('My favorite animal is: ' + cat);
```

But what happens if you want to store multiple values? You have to create multiple variables:

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="vYWmGYy" height="175" autoplay=true %}

This becomes unwieldy pretty quickly. Whenever you want to add an animal to your zoo, you have to add a new variable, and then add code that uses that variable.

This is where arrays come in handy!

# Arrays

Remember that values can be of different types. So far you've seen strings, numbers, and booleans. Arrays are a new type, and they let you store multiple values.

To create an array, start with `[ ]` square brackets, and then inside those square brackets, add a comma-separated list of values:

```javascript
let animals = ['lions', 'tigers', 'bears'];
```

After you create an array, you can access the values inside of it by index using `[]` square brackets and then a number:

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="WNXjwRg" height="175" autoplay=true %}

**Note:** Array indexes start at `0`. So the first value is at index `0`, the second value is at index `1`, the third value is at index `2`, etc.

# For Loops

Now the `animals` array stores multiple values, but the HTML still references each value one at a time. This isn't much of an improvement, because if you add an animal to the array, you still need to write code that adds it to the page.

Remember that `for` loops let you repeat code multiple times. You can combine `for` loops and arrays to repeat the same code for multiple values:

```javascript
for(let i = 0; i < animals.length; i++) {
  document.write('<li>' + animals[i] + '</li>');
}
```

This code creates a `for` loop that loops from `0` to `animals.length` (which is a special variable that arrays give you). Inside the body of the loop, the code writes the value at that index to the page.

Now you no longer have to write code for each value in the array- the `for` loop takes care of it for you!

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="ZEaKWmY" height="200" autoplay=true %}

Try modifying this code so the zoo contains 10 different animals. Notice that you only need to change what's in the array, not the code that processes it.

## For Of Loops

The pattern of using a `for` loop to do something with every value in an array is so common that there's now a shortcut for it called the `for of` loop. It looks like this:

```
for(let animal of animals) {
  document.write('<li>' + animal + '</li>');
}
```

This syntax lets you avoid creating a loop variable like `i` or `index`, and automatically loops over the array for you.

# Getting Arrays

The code above creates an array using the `[ ]` square bracket syntax. You can also **get** an array from various functions. Here are some examples:

## Getting Elements

Remember that the `document.getElementById()` takes an ID as a parameter and returns the element with that ID:

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="mRbmmR" height="200" autoplay=true %}

Similarly, the `document.getElementsByTagName()` function takes an HTML tag name (like `h1` or `p`) and returns an array containing every element with that tag. Then you can loop over the array and modify every element. Here's an example:

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="xxPrKjw" height="200" autoplay=true %}

The `document.getElementsByClassName()` is similar, except it takes a CSS class name instead.

## Splitting Strings

You've seen string values that contain text, like this:

```javascript
let message = 'the quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog';
```

You can use the `split()` function to separate a string into individual parts. The `split()` function takes a regular expression, which is a pattern to use as a delimiter. Here's some code that splits a string on spaces, which returns an array containing each individual word in the string:

```javascript
let wordsArray = message.split(/\s+/);
```

Putting it all together, it looks like this:

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="KKyqBNj" height="200" autoplay=true %}

These are two examples of functions that return an array, but there are many more. But the idea is the same: you call a function to get an array, and then you can loop over the values in it.

# Array Functions

In addition to looping over the values in an array, you can also call functions on an array to modify it. Here are some examples:

## Adding Values

The `push()` function adds a value to an array:

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="JjOJBJN" height="200" autoplay=true %}

## Removing Values

The `splice()` function removes a value from an array. It takes two arguments: an index and a count.

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="mdqwjBK" height="200" autoplay=true %}

## Sorting Arrays

The `sort()` function rearranges the values in your array so they're in order.

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="MWOoBra" height="200" autoplay=true %}

These are a few examples of functions that you can use after you have an array, but there are many more. Check out [W3Schools](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_array_methods.asp) and [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array) for more information.

# Data Processing

Arrays and `for` loops are used for many things. Anytime you have repeated data, like a list of messages, or posts, or images, you're probably using an array and a `for` loop. Another common usage of arrays and `for` loops is data processing. Here are a few examples:

## Conditional Output

Let's say you have an array of words, and you want to output the words that start with the letter `K`. You can put an `if` statement inside your loop to do that:

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="JjOJBzM" height="200" autoplay=true %}

## Calculating the Maximum

Let's say you have an array of words, and you want to find the longest. You can use a combination of variables, `for` loops, and `if` statements to find it.

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="oNowMQq" height="200" autoplay=true %}

Finding the minimum is very similar!

These are two specific examples, but my real goal was to show the general pattern of using a `for` loop along with the other concepts you've learned. A big part of coding is figuring out the right combination of things to use to accomplish your goal!

# Homework

- Create a webpage where users can enter a list of their favorite animals. Show the animals as an alphabetized list.
- Create a string that holds the lyrics to your favorite song. Then output the words in alphabetical order, the longest word, the shortest word, and all words that start with the first letter of your name.
