---
layout: tutorial
title: CSS in React
thumbnail: /tutorials/javascript/images/react-1.png
tagline: Use CSS to style your React apps.
sort-key: 1700
meta-title: React CSS Tutorial
meta-description: Use CSS to style your React apps.
meta-image: /tutorials/javascript/images/react-1.png
previousPost: /tutorials/javascript/react-lifting-state
nextPost: /tutorials/javascript/
tags: [tutorial, javascript, react]
---

{% include toc.md %}

Now you know how to build a React app using stateful components. So far, all of the example apps used unstyled HTML. This tutorial walks through using CSS in React so you can style your React apps.

## CSS in HTML

Before we talk about CSS in React, think about how CSS works in plain old HTML. You can style elements directly, or you can use classes or IDs:

{% include codepen-new.html slug-hash="MWVwOyj" height=300 autoplay=true default-tab="html" %}

If you're not familiar with CSS, you can learn more here:

{% include url-thumbnail.html url="/tutorials/html/css" %}

## React Generates HTML

To understand CSS in React, keep in mind that React's end result is plain old HTML (and JavaScript).

For example, try inspecting the resulting HTML of this React code:

{% include codepen-vertical.html slug-hash="KKopQXL" height=400 autoplay=true %}

That React code generates this HTML content:

```html
<div id="root">
  <div>
    <h1>Things</h1>
    <ul>
      <li>Thing 1</li>
      <li>Thing 2</li>
      <li>Thing 3</li>
      <li>Thing 4</li>
      <li>Thing 5</li>
    </ul>
  </div>
</div>
```

Although the React code contains a `Thing` component, the resulting HTML only contains HTML tags like `<div>`, `<h1>`, `<ul>`, and `<li>`.

## CSS in React

Now you know that React generates HTML, and you can use CSS from HTML. With that in mind, using CSS in React is all about getting React to include CSS classes and styling in the resulting HTML.

For the most part, CSS in React works exactly like it works in HTML. You can include a stylesheet, a `<style>` element, or inline styles in your HTML to style your elements:

{% include codepen-vertical.html slug-hash="gOepvoz" height=500 autoplay=true %}

The only exception is that **React does not use the `class` attribute** to assign a CSS class to an attribute. That's because React is JavaScript, and the `class` keyword is reserved in JavaScript.

Instead, use the `className` attribute:

{% include codepen-vertical.html slug-hash="abYOPJX" height=600 autoplay=true %}

This example contains a couple interesting parts.

First, this section of code creates an `<h1>` element with a `className` of `heading`:

```jsx
<h1 className="heading">
  Things
</h1>
```

Then, the `Thing` component renders an `<li>` element, and gives the `<li>` a `className` based on its `isEven` property.

```jsx
class Thing extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <li className={this.props.isEven ? "even" : "odd"}>
             Thing {this.props.index}
           </li>;
  }
}
```

Finally, the CSS styles the elements, IDs, and classes. This works exactly the same as it works in regular HTML, because that's what React generates!

```html
<style>
  #root {
    border: thin solid black;
    width: 500px;
    margin: auto;
  }

  .heading {
    text-align: center;
    font-style: italic;
  }

  li {
    list-style: none;
    width: 200px;
    padding: 10px;
  }

  .even {
    background: cyan;
  }

  .odd {
    background: purple;
    color: white;
  }
</style>
```

## React Elements vs HTML Elements

When you're writing React, you're probably writing JSX. JSX syntax *looks* like HTML inside of JavaScript, but it's really plain old JavaScript behind the scenes.

You can use the [Babel browser translator](https://babeljs.io/repl#?browsers=defaults%2C%20not%20ie%2011%2C%20not%20ie_mob%2011&build=&builtIns=false&corejs=3.21&spec=false&loose=false&code_lz=DwCwjABAxgNghgZwQOTgWwKYF4BEINwAmAlgHYDmOAfACohnkLAD04VQA&debug=false&forceAllTransforms=false&shippedProposals=false&circleciRepo=&evaluate=false&fileSize=false&timeTravel=false&sourceType=module&lineWrap=true&presets=react&prettier=false&targets=&version=7.18.7&externalPlugins=&assumptions=%7B%7D) to see the JavaScript that’s generated from a snippet of JSX. Try converting this JSX to JavaScript:

```jsx
<h1 className="heading">Things</h1>
```

That JSX is converted to this JavaScript:

```javascript
React.createElement("h1", {className: "heading"}, "Things");
```

This JavaScript calls the `React.createElement()` function, tells it to represent an `h1` tag, passes it an object containing the `className` attribute, and gives it a content argument of `"Things"`.

To understand why you have to use `className` instead of `class`, try this instead:

```jsx
<h1 class="heading">Things</h1>
```

If you try to use the `class` attribute in your JSX, you'll get this error:

```error
Warning: Invalid DOM property `class`. Did you mean `className`?
```

That's because the above JSX generates this JavaScript:

```javascript
React.createElement("h1", {class: "heading"}, "Things");
```

This JavaScript is invalid, because `class` can't be a variable name. That's why JSX uses `className`: because it's not HTML, it's JavaScript!

If using `className` instead of `class` is still confusing, here's how I think about it: JSX creates a **React element**, which is a JavaScript object that contains a `className` variable. React then converts that React element into an **HTML element** containing a `class` attribute, and the HTML element is added to the DOM.

## (Not) Thinking in React

In most of my other React tutorials, I've talked about how React makes more sense if you "think in React". React has its own opinions about how code and data should be organized, and understanding those opinions can help you understand why React works the way it does.

However, I think understanding CSS in React is more about thinking in HTML, not in React. React itself doesn't care about CSS at all! It's all about the final generated HTML, which is what the CSS ends up styling.

So if you find yourself asking a question about using CSS in React:

- How do I turn a button red in React?
- In React, how do I italicize every other element?
- How to style text in React?

You should instead ask yourself the same question, but without React at all:

- How do I turn a button red in HTML?
- In HTML, how do I italicize every other element?
- How to style text in HTML?

Research that question, and then think about how you'd generate that HTML using React.

## To-Do List Example

Here's our handy dandy to-do list example, with some beautiful CSS styling:

{% include codepen-vertical.html slug-hash="OJvVNNZ" height=550 autoplay=true %}

## Learn More

- [Syling and CSS - Official React Docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/faq-styling.html)
