---
layout: tutorial
title: Anatomy of a Web App
thumbnail: /tutorials/java-server/images/java-ee-1.png
tagline: How to structure your web app directory.
sort-key: 140
meta-title: Anatomy of a Web App
meta-description: How to structure your web app directory.
meta-image: /tutorials/java-server/images/servlets-7.png
tags: [tutorial, java, server]
---

{% include toc.md %}

So far, you've run a server using [Tomcat](/tutorials/java-server/tomcat) or [Jetty](/tutorials/java-server/jetty-setup). You deployed a "hello world" web app to your server, and you've visited that web app by navigating to `localhost:8080` in your web browser.

This tutorial takes a closer look at how a web app is structured. You'll need to work with this structure in all of the following tutorials, so make sure you understand it before continuing!

If you're using [embedded Jetty](/tutorials/java-server/embedded-jetty), then you can skip this tutorial.

# Webapp Directory

This tutorial assumes you're either using a Jetty server with its own `jetty-base` directory, or a Tomcat server.

Both of these servers contain a `webapps` directory, which is where your code will go.

The rest of this tutorial walks through building what you'll put in the `webapps` directory.

# Servlets

You'll learn more about servlets in the [servlets tutorial](/tutorials/java-server/servlets), but for now, all you need to know is that a servlet is a Java class that runs code on a server when the user accesses a certain URL.

For example, here's a hello world servlet class:

```java
package io.happycoding;

import java.io.IOException;

import jakarta.servlet.annotation.WebServlet;
import jakarta.servlet.http.HttpServlet;
import jakarta.servlet.http.HttpServletRequest;
import jakarta.servlet.http.HttpServletResponse;

@WebServlet("/hello")
public class HelloWorldServlet extends HttpServlet {

  @Override
  public void doGet(HttpServletRequest request, HttpServletResponse response)
      throws IOException {
    response.setContentType("text/html;");
    response.getWriter().println("<h1>Hello world!</h1>");
  }
}
```

This servlet uses the `@WebServlet` annotation to map to the `/hello` URL and writes a hard-coded `<h1>Hello world!</h1>` message to the response.

To include this servlet in your web app, you need to compile it and put the generated `.class` file in a specific directory. Keep reading to learn more!

# Anatomy of a Web App

Each web app is a folder that contains files in a certain directory structure. The structure should be like this:

- `Web App Name`
  - Static files like `index.html`, `script.js`, and `styles.css` go here
  - `WEB-INF/`
    - `classes`
      - Compiled server `.class` files go into packages here

For example, you might have a `HelloWorld` webapp directory that looks like this:

- `HelloWorld`
  - `index.html`
  - `WEB-INF/`
    - `classes`
      - `/io/happycoding/servlets/`
        - `HelloWorldServlet.class`

Remember that you can also use `root` as the web app's name to make it the "top level" web app without including its name in its URL.

# Command Line

I don't recommend trying to build your code directly from the command line, but doing it this way at first can help you understand how everything fits together.

You can manually create the above directory structure by creating folders and copying files into them. But how do you compile your servlet classes?

The `HelloWorldServlet` class references a few classes in the `jakarta` package. Where do those classes come from?

Both Jetty and Tomcat come with a `lib` directory, which contains all of the `.jar` files you need to build your server code, including the jar file that contains the `jakarta` package. To compile your server classes, you'd use that `lib` directory as your classpath, using the `-cp` argument.

You can compile your server code with one of these commands, depending on whether you're using Jetty or Tomcat:

## Jetty

```
javac -cp /path/to/jetty/lib/* /path/to/your/code/YourClass.java
```

For example, I would run this command:

```
javac -cp C:/Users/kevin/Desktop/jetty-home-11.0.5\lib\* io/happycoding/servlets/HelloWorldServlet.java
```

## Tomcat

```
javac -cp /path/to/tomcat/lib/* /path/to/your/code/YourClass/java
```

For example, I would run this command:

```
javac -cp C:\Users\kevin\Desktop\apache-tomcat-10.0.7\lib\* io/happycoding/servlets/HelloWorldServlet.java
```

In either case, you should now have a `.class` file for the class you compiled, which you can include in the web app directory structure outlined above.

You can now copy your whole web app directory into the `webapps` directory of your server, run your server, and then navigate to `http://localhost:8080/YourWebAppName/` to view your web app!

# War Files

Now you know how to create a web app directory, which contains all of the files you need to serve your website, including the HTML files and the Java classes that run on the server.

Another common way to package your web app is into a `.war` file, which is a lot like a `.zip` file, or a `.jar` file. A `.war` file is a **W**eb **A**pplication **R**esource (or a **W**eb **Ar**chive, depending on who you ask) which collects an entire web app directory into a single file. This is handy for deploying to live servers, because you only need to upload a single `.war` file instead of a whole directory.

To create a `.war` file, `cd` into your web app directory (after compiling all of your classes) and then run this command:

```
jar -cfv YourWebAppName.war *
```

This runs the `jar` command, and the `-cvf` argument tells it to **c**reate a **f**ile and to **v**erbosely print information about what it's doing. Then `YourWebAppName.war` tells it to create a `.war` file, and `*` tells it to add all of the files and folders from the current directory.

That should give you a `YourWebappName.war` file. You can move that file into the `webapps` directory of your server, just like you could move the whole directory. Your server will automatically extract your web app into its own directory.

The `.war` format is commonly used by many live servers. If you can create a `.war` file, then you can deploy a live server to places like Amazon Web Services.

# Maven

You can follow the above steps to build your web app using the command line to compile your classes and to create a `.war` file, but that's going to get pretty annoying, especially as you start using other libraries.

[Maven](https://maven.apache.org/) is a tool that manages your classpath for you, and makes it easier to compile and build (and eventually deploy) your server. To use Maven, first download and install it from [here](https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi).

Maven expects a specific directory structure:

- `Web App Name`
  - `pom.xml`
  - `src/`
    - `main/`
      - `java/`
        - Java packages and classes go here
      - `webapp/`
        - Static files like `index.html`, `script.js`, and `styles.css` go here

For example, you might have a `HelloWorld` webapp directory that looks like this:

- `HelloWorld`
  - `pom.xml`
  - `src/`
    - `main/`
      - `java/`
        - `io/happycoding/servlets/`
          - `HelloWorldServlet.java`
      - `webapp/`
        - `index.html`

Maven uses a `pom.xml` file to configure a project, including information about the classpath and how to build and package the code. Here's an example `pom.xml` file:

```xml
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
    xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
  <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

  <groupId>io.happycoding</groupId>
  <artifactId>hello-world-maven</artifactId>
  <version>1</version>
  <packaging>war</packaging>

  <properties>
    <!-- Java 11 -->
    <maven.compiler.source>11</maven.compiler.source>
    <maven.compiler.target>11</maven.compiler.target>
    <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
  </properties>

  <dependencies>
    <!-- Jakarta Servlets API -->
    <dependency>
      <groupId>jakarta.servlet</groupId>
      <artifactId>jakarta.servlet-api</artifactId>
      <version>5.0.0</version>
      <scope>provided</scope>
    </dependency>
  </dependencies>

  <build>
    <plugins>
      <!-- Enable building as a .war file with `mvn package` -->
      <plugin>
        <artifactId>maven-war-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.3.1</version>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>

    <!-- The output .war file's name, which will be the name of the webapp. -->
    <finalName>${project.artifactId}</finalName>
  </build>
</project>
```

If you put all of that together, you can now compile and build your project by running this command in the same directory that contains the `pom.xml` file:

```
mvn package
```

This command will create a `target` directory, and in there you'll see a `.war` file and a directory with your web app's name. You can copy either one to your `webapps` directory to run it locally!

You can go another step further and run your whole server from Maven. See the [Jetty](https://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/jetty-11/programming-guide/index.html#jetty-maven-plugin) and [Tomcat](https://tomcat.apache.org/tomcat-10.0-doc/deployer-howto.html) deployment pages.
