---
layout: single-content-section
title: Input - Week 06
thumbnail: /tutorials/processing/images/input-12.gif
pixelate-thumbnail: true
tagline: Make interactive sketches.
sort-key: 150
meta-title: Input - Intro to Web Dev Week 06
meta-description: Learn how to make interactive sketches in p5.js.
meta-image: /tutorials/processing/images/input-12.gif
hide-video-icon: true
tags: [teaching]
---

# Input - Week 06

{% include toc.md %}

Welcome to week 6 of Intro to Creative Web Dev!

Now you know how to use `if` statements to make decisions in your code, and you know how to create animations by changing your sketch over time. This week is all about getting input from the user to make your sketch interactive!

Work through the activities in this page to complete the week.

---

# Input

First, read through this tutorial:

{% include url-thumbnail.html url="/tutorials/p5js/input" %}

---

# Project

Now you know how to make interactive sketches in p5.js.

To practice that, create an interactive p5.js sketch that uses at least **five** input variables or functions. Check out **events** section of the [p5.js reference](https://p5js.org/reference/) for a full list of options. Feel free to choose any five variables or functions from that list!

{% include youtube-embed.html slug="2iB7jCU-SY4" %}

---

For example:

```javascript
function setup() {
  createCanvas(400, 400);
  background(32);
}

function draw() {
  if (mouseIsPressed) {
    fill(random(255), random(255), random(255));
    circle(mouseX, mouseY, 25);
  }
}

function keyPressed() {
  background(32);
}
```

This code uses the `mouseIsPressed` variable to check whether the mouse is currently pressed, and if so it uses the `mouseX` and `mouseY` variables to draw a randomly colored circle at the mouse's location. It also uses the `keyPressed()` function to clear the screen whenever the user presses a key on their keyboard.

This code had 4 total variables and functions. Try to create a sketch that uses at least five!

Check out the [examples](/tutorials/p5js) page for inspiration, and don't be afraid to get creative. This is the last week you'll be working with p5.js, so try stretching your p5.js muscles!
