---
layout: tutorial
title: Arrays and Strings
thumbnail: /tutorials/interviewing/images/arrays-1.jpg
tagline: The most common data structures in interview questions.
sort-key: 500
meta-title: Arrays and Strings
meta-description: The most common data structures in interview questions.
meta-image: /tutorials/interviewing/images/arrays-1.jpg
previousPost: /tutorials/interviews
tags: [tutorial, interviewing]
disable_comments: true
---

{% include toc.md %}

Arrays are a foundational data structure, available in pretty much every language. That makes them very common components of interview questions.

I'm assuming you're already familiar with the [fundamentals](/tutorials/interviewing/fundamentals), so I won't spend a ton of time explaining how arrays work. Instead, I'll focus on how they're used in interview questions, and some techniques that come in handy.

# Input and Output

Many interview questions follow this pattern: *Can you write a function that takes an array of blah blah blah, and returns blah blah blah?*

The `blah blah blah` varies wildly, but here are some examples:

- Take an array of `int` values, and return indexes of the values that sum to `target`.
- Take an array of a stock prices over time, and return the best time to buy and sell the stock.
- Take an array of overlapping start and end times, and return an array with deduplicated durations.

These are just a couple random examples, but the important pattern to notice is that in each question you're taking an array, doing some processing or calculating, and then returning an answer.

Here are a few techniques that help with this kind of question.

# Tracking Best So Far

Very often, you'll need to iterate over an array and track the "best" option you've seen so far. The definition of "best" depends on the question, but here are some examples:

- Given an array of numbers, can you select the maximum value?
- Given an array of Strings, can you select the longest one?
- Given an array of points, can you select the one furthest from the origin?

The code for this approach looks something like this:

```java
public int getMaximumValue(int[] array) {
  int max = Integer.MIN_VALUE;
  for (int i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    if(array[i] > max) {
      max = array[i];
    }
  }
  return max;
}
```

In this example, `max` starts out as `Integer.MIN_VALUE`, the smallest number an `int` can hold: `-2^31` or `-2,147,483,648`. This placeholder value works because we're probably going to encounter a number that's bigger than this right away. Your placeholder value depends on how you're defining the best element in your array, but it should generally start out as whatever the worst option would be.

Importantly, this code will not work if the array is empty, so be careful that you're asking about corner cases and handling them appropriately.

The above pattern is what I would try to remember, but here's an example that handles corner cases more explicitly:

```java
public int getMaximumValue(int[] array) {
  if (array == null || array.length == 0) {
    throw new IllegalArgumentException("Provide an array with at least one value.");
  }

  int max = array[0];
  for (int i = 1; i < array.length; i++) {
    if(array[i] > max) {
      max = array[i];
    }
  }
  return max;
}
```

# Nested Loops

Tracking the best so far is a fundamental approach while using arrays, but chances are your question is going to be a little more complicated than finding the min or max in an array.

Rather than tracking a single "best" value, you're more likely to have elements that relate to each other in some other way. Examples include:

- Given an array, return whether that array contains any duplicates.
- Given an array of numbers, return whether any two numbers sum to exactly 100.

You might be able to use specific data structures or tricks to solve this kind of problem with a single `for` loop, but you can often get started by solving it with a more naive or "brute force" solution by nesting multiple loops inside each other.

Here's an example that detects duplicates:

```java
public boolean containsDuplicates(int[] array){
  for (int i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    for (int j = i + 1; j < array.length; j++) {
      if (array[i] == array[j]) {
        return true;
      }
    }
  }

  return false;
}
```

Again, there are other ways to solve this specific problem, but the nested loop pattern applies to many problems.

# Sorting

A big part of solving an interview question is looking for ways to make your life easier. If you find yourself thinking *"this question would be a lot easier if the array was sorted..."* then don't be afraid to sort it!

Here's the same `containsDuplicates()` example, this time using a sorted array:

```java
public boolean containsDuplicates(int[] array) {

  Arrays.sort(array);

  for (int i = 0; i < array.length - 1; i++) {
    if (array[i] == array[i + 1]) {
      return true;
    }
  }

  return false;
}
```

This code no longer relies on a nested for loop, and instead relies on the sorted nature of the array to check for duplicates in a single pass. In other words, the time complexity of the algorithm went from `O(n^2)` to `O(n * log(n))`, because `Arrays.sort()` takes `O(n * log(n))` time.

You can't always take advantage of built-in functions like `Arrays.sort()`, but it never hurts to ask. The worst case scenario is that your interviewer says no, but they'll see that you're aware of these language features.

# Think Outside the For Loop

A plain old `for` loop that iterates over every index and element in an array in order is one of the most common structures in interview problems, but don't limit yourself to using that exact technique in every question.

For example, some questions are better solved by iterating backwards:

```java
public static String reverseString(String input) {
  StringBuilder output = new StringBuilder();
  for (int i = input.length() - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
    output.append(input.charAt(i));
  }
  return output.toString();
}
```

You might also use something like a [sliding window](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/8269916/what-is-sliding-window-algorithm-examples) instead of a nested for loop.

# Pick a Better Data Structure

Although you're often given data in an array, that doesn't always mean you're stuck with an array. If you can think of a data structure that would make your life easier, you should tell your interviewer that!

For example, here's the same `containsDuplicates()` function, this time using a `HashSet` data structure:

```java
public boolean containsDuplicates(int[] array) {
  Set<Integer> set = new HashSet();
  for (int value : array) {
    if (set.contains(value)) {
      return true;
    }
    set.add(value);
  }
  return false;
}
```

This algorithm takes advantage of the fact that `HashSet#contains()` and `HashTag#add()` both run in constant time. All of the work of checking for duplicates is hidden by the `HashSet` implementation.

In other words, the algorithm now has `O(n)` time complexity. The `HashSet` also adds an additional `O(n)` space complexity. Trading space complexity for time complexity is another common talking point in interview questions.

Again, you can't always bring in other data structures to solve your problems for you, but if you know that a particular data structure would help, you should always tell your interviewer about it.

# Off By One Errors

One of the most common pitfalls when working with arrays and for loops is writing code that's off by one when iterating over an array.

Make sure to check your code for this kind of problem. Explain what your code does as it approaches the end of the array, and double check that your code does what you expect.

Having an off-by-one error in your code isn't the end of the world, so don't spend too much time on it. If you aren't completely sure, you can tell your interviewer that you might have an off-by-one error. Showing that you know to look for this kind of error is often just as good as not having the error at all.

# Strings

`String` is another common data type used in interviews, and it has a lot in common with arrays. In fact, behind the scenes, every `String` value contains an array of `char` values!

The `String` class contains several handy functions that make them more useful than a raw array. Here are a few examples:

- `charAt(index)` returns the character at the specified index. This is very similar to an array's `[]` bracket accessor.
- `length()` returns the length of the array. Remember that this is a function, whereas arrays have a `length` field.
- `substring(start, end)` returns a smaller string inside a larger one. Keep in mind that `start` is inclusive, but `end` is exclusive. For example, `substring(0, 2)` returns a `String` with the characters at index `0` and `1`, but not `2`. Keep this in mind when you're looking for off-by-one errors.
- `contains(substring)` returns whether a `String` contains another.
- `matches(regex)` returns whether a `String` matches a regular expression.
- `split(regex)` returns an array of `String` values, generated by splitting the `String` on a regular expression. This can be handy if you need to split out the words of a sentence into an array, for example.
- `toUpperCase()` and `toLowerCase()` do what they say on the tin.

Here are a few other tips for working with `String` values:

- `String` values are immutable. That means you can't modify a `String`, you can only create new ones.
- You should almost never use `==` to compare `String` values! Always use the `equals()` function instead.
- Don't concatenate `String` values inside a loop, use a `StringBuilder` instead. Behind the scenes, Java creates an instance of `StringBuilder` every time you concatenate two `String` values, so if you do it in a loop you create a ton of throwaway instances. Instead, create a single instance yourself and use that inside your loop.
